CO 250
=

# Formulations

Given a set $A \subseteq \mathbb{R}^n$ and a function $f: A \to \mathbb{R}$, our goal is to find $x \in A$ that minimizes or maximizes $f$.

1. **Linear Programming (LP)**. $A$ is given by *linear* constraints, and $f$ is a *linear* function.
2. **Integer Programming (IP)**. We want to maximize or minimize over the *integer* points in $A$.
3. **Nonlinear Programming (NLP)**. $A$ is given by *non-linear* constraints, and $f$ is a *non-linear* function.

## Typical Workflow

1. English language description of **practical problem**.
2. Develop **mathematical model**.
3. Feed model and data into a **solver**.

## Constrained Optimization

We consider optimization problems of the form $\min\{f(x): g_i(x)\le b_i, 1 \le i \le m, x \in \mathbb{R}^n\}$ where $n, m \in \mathbb{N}$, $b_i \in \mathbb{R}$, and $f, g_i$ are functions with form $\mathbb{R}^n \to \mathbb{R}$.

> Problems are **very hard** to solve in general, so we focus on special cases. We consider **affine** functions.

## Affine Functions

> $f: \mathbb{R}^n \to \mathbb{R}$ is **affine** if $f(x) = a^Tx + \beta$ for $a \in \mathbb{R}^n, \beta \in \mathbb{R}$. It is **linear** if $\beta = 0$.

> An optimization problem $\min\{f(x): g_i(x) \le b_i, \forall 1 \le i \le m, x \in \mathbb{R}^n\}$ is called a **linear program** if $f$ is **affine** and $g_i$ is **finite** number of **linear** functions.

- Cannot have **strict** inequalities.

## Multiperiod Models

In practice, we make a **series** of decisions that influence each other. An example of this is **multiperiod models**.

- Time split into **periods**.
- Make a **decision** in each period.
- All decisions affect the final outcome.

## IP Models

Fractional solutions are often not desirable. We can force solutions to take only integer values by formulating it was an **integer program**.

- Integer programs are **difficult** to solve.

In order to express binary decisions, we introduce a new variable $y$, such that $y = 0$ implies the first decision, and $y = 1$ implies the second.

Example: $x_1 + x_2 \ge 5$ **or** $x_3 + x_4 \ge 5$.

> 1. $x_1 + x_2 \ge 5y$.
> 2. $x_3 + x_4 \ge 5(1-y)$.
> 3. $0 \le y \le 1$.
> 4. $y \in \mathbb{Z}$.

We can solve similar situations by using a set of binary variables which sum to a specific value.
